.Dd January 10, 2019
.Dt JAIL_EXPORTER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm jail_exporter
.Nd Prometheus exporter for jail metrics
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hV
.Op Fl Fl help
.Op Fl Fl version
.Op Fl Fl rc-script
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl output.file-path Ns = Ns Ar path
.Op Fl Fl web.auth-config Ns = Ns Ar path
.Op Fl Fl web.listen-address Ns = Ns Ar addr:port
.Op Fl Fl web.telemetry-path Ns = Ns Ar path
.Nm
.Cm bcrypt
.Op Fl Fl random
.Op Fl Fl cost Ns = Ns Ar cost
.Op Fl Fl length Ns = Ns Ar length
.Op Ar password
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Command Line Arguments
.Nm jail_exporter
is a Prometheus exporter for jail metrics.
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl h , Fl Fl help
Prints help information
.It Fl V , Fl Fl version
Prints version information
.It Fl Fl rc-script
Dumps the
.Nm
.Xr rc 8
script to stdout.
This crate feature is disabled by default when installed from
.Xr pkg 8
or
.Xr ports 7
as they supply a suitable
.Xr rc 8
script already.
.It Fl Fl output.file-path Ns = Ns Ar path
Specify a
.Ar path
to write collected metrics to.
When
.Nm
is given a
.Ar path
it will exit immediately after writing the metrics and the HTTPd will not be
started.
This option is designed to be paired with the Node Exporter Textfile Collector.
Giving a
.Ar path
of
.Dq Cm -
will output collected metrics to stdout.
.It Fl Fl web.auth-config Ns = Ns Ar path
Specify a
.Ar path
to load HTTP Basic Authentication configuration from.
The configuration is in the YAML format and is documented in the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section.
There is no default location for this configuration file, but a location such
as
.Pa /usr/local/etc/jail_exporter.yaml
or
.Pa /usr/local/etc/jail_exporter/config.yaml
is suggested.
.It Fl Fl web.listen-address Ns = Ns Ar addr:port
Specify an
.Ar addr:port
on which to expose the metrics and web interface.
Defaults to
.Dq Cm 127.0.0.1:9452 .
If specifying an IPv6
.Ar addr:port
the address portion should be enclosed within square brackets, for example:
.Dq Cm [::1]:9452 .
.It Fl Fl web.telemetry-path Ns = Ns Ar path
Specify a
.Ar path
under which to expose the metrics.
Defaults to
.Dq Cm /metrics .
.El
.Ss Sub-Commands
.Nm
also features a
.Cm bcrypt
sub-command, useful for hashing the passwords used for HTTP Basic
authentication.
This sub-command features the following arguments:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl Fl random
Generates a random password and outputs both the plaintext and hashed values.
.It Fl Fl cost Ns = Ns Ar cost
Specifies the bcrypt
.Ar cost
of the hash.
Defaults to
.Dq Cm 12 .
.It Fl Fl length Ns = Ns Ar length
Specifies the password length to generate when used with the
.Fl Fl random
flag.
Defaults to
.Dq Cm 32 .
.It Ar password
Optionally specify a
.Ar password
to hash.
If a
.Ar password
is not specified, it is interactively prompted for.
.El
.Ss HTTP Basic Authentication Configuration
HTTP basic authentication is configured via a YAML configuration file.
The format of this file follows the suggestions of the Prometheus
exporter-toolkit.
This authentication configuration consists of a
.Dq basic_auth_users
key which is a map of usernames to bcrypt hashed passwords.
These hashes can be generated with the
.Nm
.Cm bcrypt
sub-command or any other utility capable of generating bcrypt hashes.
Any keys in the file other than
.Dq basic_auth_users
are ignored.
.Pp
An example HTTP basic authentication configuration can be found in the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section.
.Sh USAGE
.Nm
must be run as
.Dq root
in order to access the required
.Xr rctl 8
APIs.
Although
.Fx
ships with RACCT/RCTL support in the kernel, it is disabled by default.
It can be enabled by setting
.Va kern.racct.enable Ns = Ns Qq Ar 1
in
.Pa /boot/loader.conf .
After setting this, a reboot will be required to enable RACCT/RCTL.
.Sh METRICS
The metrics that are exported are those listed in the RESOURCES section of
.Xr rctl 8 ,
and the following additional metrics:
.Bl -tag -width num
.It Va exporter_build_info
The version of the currently running exporter, and the version of Rust used to
build the exporter.
The version is given in the
.Dq version
label on the metric, while the Rust version used to build the exporter is given
in the
.Dq rustversion
label.
Does not possess a
.Dq name
label.
.It Va id
The ID of the named jail
.It Va num
The current number of jails running.
Does not possess a
.Dq name
label.
.El
.Pp
All metrics are prefixed with the string
.Dq jail_
and in most cases (except for the metrics mentioned above) possess a
.Dq name
label containing the name of the jail.
An example of a metric output by the exporter would be:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# HELP jail_cputime_seconds_total CPU time, in seconds
# TYPE jail_cputime_seconds_total counter
jail_cputime_seconds_total{name="test"} 300
.Ed
.Sh "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.Nm
can also take its configuration from environment variables.
In the event that both command line options and environment variables are
specified, the command line options will win.
.Bl -tag -width WEB_LISTEN_ADDRESS
.It Ev OUTPUT_FILE_PATH
is equivalent to setting the
.Fl Fl output.file-path
option.
.It Ev WEB_AUTH_CONFIG
is equivalent to setting the
.Fl Fl web.auth-config
option.
.It Ev WEB_LISTEN_ADDRESS
is equivalent to setting the
.Fl Fl web.listen-address
option.
.It Ev WEB_TELEMETRY_PATH
is equivalent to setting the
.Fl Fl web.telemetry-path
option.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/local/etc/rc.d/jail_exporter -compact
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/rc.d/jail_exporter
the
.Xr rc 8
script
.It Pa /usr/local/sbin/jail_exporter
the exporter daemon
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss HTTP Basic Authentication
Simple configuration file for two users:
.Pp
.Dl ---
.Dl basic_auth_users:
.Dl \ \ foo: '$2b$12$cGBwrALG2Crkm5jPdvzlG.R8.j8LMeCEecm4y/So6YVd4YiIrfqsW'
.Dl \ \ bar: '$2b$12$8c6yHGFexzAvbtNSHV3WNO0zJoaWfDy9WqX7s8vCAajV08LE/cW06'
.Ss Sub-Commands
Generating a bcrypt password hash by specifying the password on the command
line using the default bcrypt cost:
.Pp
.Dl $ jail_exporter bcrypt foopass
.Pp
Generating a random bcrypt password hash with an increased cost and custom
length:
.Pp
.Dl $ jail_exporter bcrypt --random --cost 14 --length 48
.Pp
Generating a bcrypt password via the interactive prompt:
.Pp
.Dl $ jail_exporter bcrypt
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rctl 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7 ,
.Xr jail 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was started during the summer of 2018 on
.Fx 11.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was developed by
.An David O'Rourke
with contributions from
.An Fabian Freyer .
.Sh BUGS
Please report bugs, issues, and feature requests to
.Lk https://github.com/phyber/jail_exporter/issues
